CASMMON-259 Create documentation for Observability Framework (#3359)
Cray-HPE/docs-csm: operations/observability/Observability.md

# Install and Upgrade Observability Framework

## Overview

Install and Upgrade Observability Framework creates unified consistent requirements for each product including assertions for Goss health checks, as well metrics and dashboards for health checks.

> The framework also includes a unified consistent method to automatically track Time to Install (TTI) and Time to Upgrade (TTU), as well as error and pattern count across clusters and product streams.

Author: I have reframed this paragraph and rewritten the overview.

> 1. Establish a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product streams for install and upgrade observability.

Author: I have changed it to unordered list.

> 1. Establish a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product streams for install and upgrade observability.

Author: Yes, added the same.

> 1. Establish a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product streams for install and upgrade observability.

Author: operations/observability/Observability.md:[14](https://github.com/Cray-HPE/docs-csm/actions/runs/4291913692/jobs/7477701189#step:5:15):1 MD007/ul-indent Unordered list indentation [Expected: 2; Actual: 3]
operations/observability/Observability.md:15:1 MD007/ul-indent Unordered list indentation [Expected: 2; Actual: 3]
operations/observability/Observability.md:16:1 MD007/ul-indent Unordered list indentation [Expected: 2; Actual: 3]
operations/observability/Observability.md:19:1 MD007/ul-indent Unordered list indentation [Expected: 2; Actual: 3]
operations/observability/Observability.md:20:1 MD007/ul-indent Unordered list indentation [Expected: 2; Actual: 3]
operations/observability/Observability.md:22:1 MD007/ul-indent Unordered list indentation [Expected: 2; Actual: 3]

Having these errors in linting because of these unordered list now.

   - Inside-out Views

>    - Outside-in Views

Author: I have added what it means in the braces next to them now for better understanding.

   - Product stream health

2. Drill down health dashboard with roll up.
   - Aggregate checks - Problem/OK counts across each product stream.
   - Functional checks - Product stream functional Goss suites for key areas.
     For example, REST APIs, micro-services, Kubernetes, network, and database health for the specific product stream.
   - Granular checks - Individual Goss tests for component level health checks within a functional area of a given product stream.
     For example, management switch configuration verification, routing table checks on OS, gateway tests, and Container Network Interface (CNI) tests.

3. Boot, install, and upgrade duration monitoring.
   This will do automatic calculation and reporting of both the time a given section of install/upgrade has taken, as well as metrics on how many GOSS tests results show OK versus PROBLEM status.

> 4. Time, node, product stream, capacity, and other dimension based health and performance insight.

Author: Changes done.

> 5. Multi-Interval Continuous Health Checks.

Author: Seems like a mistake, changes made by removing the capitals.

>    Define and implement regular automatic scheduled health checks to occur both during install and upgrade, as well as after the install or upgrade has been completed.

Author: Used "The framework defines and implements"

   The frequency needs to be determined but will likely include every six hours, once a day, and once a week.

> 6. Automate the deployment, installation, and configuration of the Install and Upgrade Observability framework in a CSM environment.

Author: Changes made for this as well.

> 6. Automate the deployment, installation, and configuration of the Install and Upgrade Observability framework in a CSM environment.

Author: Capitalized the framework.

> 7. The automatic generation of configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and KPIs into the frequency of errors across the complex systems, panels to visualize the outliers, and trends in the complex system  across different dimensions.

Author: Expanded acronym.

> 7. The automatic generation of configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and KPIs into the frequency of errors across the complex systems, panels to visualize the outliers, and trends in the complex system  across different dimensions.

Author: Changed the sentence and used provides a way to identify the trends.

> 7. The automatic generation of configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and KPIs into the frequency of errors across the complex systems, panels to visualize the outliers, and trends in the complex system  across different dimensions.

Author: Removed the extra whitespace

> The following IUF topics are discussed in the following subsections.

Author: We just implemented the IUF.md like format and the TOC starts after the overview.

- [Automation of Observability framework](#automation-of-observability-framework)
  - [Features](#automation-framework-features)
  - [Automation workflow](#automation-workflow)
  - [`systemd` services](#systemd-services)
- [IUF Timing dashboard](#iuf-timing-dashboard)
  - [Features](#timing-dashboard-features)
  - [Prometheus metrics using Argo Workflow](#prometheus-metrics-using-argo-workflow)
  - [Timing Dashboard](#timing-dashboard)
- [GOSS Tests for PIT and NCN](#goss-tests-for-pit-and-ncn)
  - [Overview](#goss-test-overview)
  - [Workflow](#workflow)
  - [Log file format](#log-file-format)
  - [Grok-exporter deployment, service and service-monitor](#grok-exporter-deployment-service-and-service-monitor)
  - [Configuration file for the grok-exporter](#configuration-file-for-the-grok-exporter)
  - [Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard](#prometheus-metrics-and-grafana-dashboard)
- [Error Dashboard](#error-dashboard)
  - [Features](#error-dashboards-features)
  - [Error Dashboards](#error-dashboards)

## Automation of Observability framework

> Grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana get instantiated automatically on the Combined Install Media LiveCD for PIT dimension of metrics for error/debug/count.

Reviewer: This observability framework was there in papaya release as well where there were couple of steps to install it via tar files.  Now for Alice we have automated it.

### Automation framework features

> - Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana containers deployed initially on the `csm-pit` remote server for monitoring before systems are installed.

Reviewer: csm-pit means PIT node.

> - Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana containers deployed initially on the `csm-pit` remote server for monitoring before systems are installed.

Author: Yes, I have made the change and used "the PIT node" instead.

> - Define and build IaC repo to store observability configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Define and build IaC repository to store observability configuration.
```

> - Define and build IaC repo to store observability configuration.

Reviewer 2: Define IaC acronym

Reviewer: Changed.

> - Define and build automations to update configuration of observability configuration when the IaC configuration repo is updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Define and build automations to update configuration of observability configuration when the IaC configuration repository is updated.
```

> - Create an RPM with all the three containers and services for `csm-pit` and `csm-shared-pit` using Jenkins pipeline.

Reviewer 2: This really sounds like it's intended for internal use, not customers. Or am I way offtrack? Why would this be in the public CSM docs?

Reviewer: Changed

- Mount all of the log files from `csm-pit` to the container that the grok-exporter will parse.

### Automation workflow

![Automation framework workflow](../../img/operations/AutomationFrameworkWorkflow.png "Automation framework workflow")

### `systemd` services

> Command to check the status of `pit-observability` services which includes grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(`pit#`) Commands to check the status of `pit-observability` services which includes grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana.
```

```bash

> systemctl status grok-exporter.service

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
systemctl status grok-exporter.service
```

Example output:

```text
````

             └─ 22381 /usr/bin/conmon --api-version 1 -c 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb29eb7cf1064dc159c9ae66 -u 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd6973>

Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:             "IOMaximumBandwidth": 0,
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:             "CgroupConf": null
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:         }
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:     }
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]: ]
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: 2023-01-25 00:04:36.016806447 +0000 UTC m=+0.306557966 container init 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb2>
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: 2023-01-25 00:04:36.07000859 +0000 UTC m=+0.359760105 container start 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb2>
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: grok-exporter
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit grok-exporter[22381]: Starting server on http://redbull-pit:9144/metrics
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit systemd[1]: Started Grok-exporter.
```

```bash

> systemctl status prometheus.service

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
systemctl status prometheus.service
```
Example output:

```text
````

Reviewer: done

Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=main.go:1214 level=info msg="Completed loading of configuration file" file>
Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=main.go:957 level=info msg="Server is ready to receive web requests."
Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=manager.go:937 level=info component="rule manager" msg="Starting rule mana>
Jan 25 03:06:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T03:06:09.240Z caller=compact.go:519 level=info component=tsdb msg="write block" mint=1674605167>
Jan 25 03:06:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T03:06:09.242Z caller=head.go:840 level=info component=tsdb msg="Head GC completed" duration=1.3>
Jan 25 05:00:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T05:00:09.261Z caller=compact.go:519 level=info component=tsdb msg="write block" mint=1674612007>
Jan 25 05:00:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T05:00:09.263Z caller=head.go:840 level=info component=tsdb msg="Head GC completed" duration=1.7
```

```bash

> systemctl status grafana.service

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
systemctl status grafana.service
```
Example output:

```text
````

Reviewer: done

Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=migrator t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.26+0000 lvl=info msg="migrations completed" performed=0 skipped=393 durati>
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=plugin.manager t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.42+0000 lvl=info msg="Plugin registered" pluginId=input
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=query_data t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.43+0000 lvl=info msg="Query Service initialization"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=live.push_http t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.44+0000 lvl=info msg="Live Push Gateway initialization"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=grafanaStorageLogger t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="storage starting"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="warming cache for startup"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert.multiorg.alertmanager t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="starting MultiOrg Alertmanager"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=http.server t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.55+0000 lvl=info msg="HTTP Server Listen" address=[::]:3000 protocol=http>
```

> ## IUF Timing dashboard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## IUF timing dashboard
```

### Timing dashboard features

- Use Argo workflows to collect the install/upgrade timing details.
- Create Argo workflows to get metrics from the details available.
- Generate Prometheus install/upgrade timing metrics.
- Create Grafana dashboard using Prometheus metrics.

> ### Prometheus metrics using Argo Workflow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow
```

> Able to get the start-time and end-time as Prometheus labels for the operations using Argo metrics approach. Added record time stamp task at the beginning and end of the operation template using timestamp output parameter as an input to the metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Able to get the start time and end time as Prometheus labels for the operations using Argo metrics approach. Added record time stamp task at the beginning and end of the operation template using timestamp output parameter as an input to the metrics.
```

> Able to get the start-time and end-time as Prometheus labels for the operations using Argo metrics approach. Added record time stamp task at the beginning and end of the operation template using timestamp output parameter as an input to the metrics.

Reviewer 2: Why is added in past tense? If we're listing improvements from previous versions, that should be made clearer.

Author: This sentence is reframed and tense changed.

Metrics captured for the operations:

- start time
- end time
- duration
- status
- product name
- product version

Metrics captured for the stage:

- stage name
- stage type
- stage start time (derived from min(start time of the all the operations presented in the stage)

> - stage end time (derived from max(start time of the all the operations presented in the stage)

Reviewer 2: Imbalanced parentheses -- and really should avoid nested parenthetical text like this if we can avoid it

- stage duration (stage end time - stage start time)

> - stage status (derived from all the operations status)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- stage status (derived from all the operations statuses)
```

Metrics captured for the product:

- product name
- product start time (derived from the start time of the process-media stage)
- product end time (derived from the start time of the post-install-check stage)
- product status (derived from the status of the stage)

### Timing dashboard

> - Created dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard to track install/upgrade status of any product, stage and operation.

Reviewer 2: Why is "created" past tense?

Author: Removed "created"

> - Dashboard calculates the execution time for the install/ upgrade of any product, stage and operation.
> - The status of the install/ upgrade for product, stage and operation are Failed/Succeeded.
> - There is dropdown for selection of the product, stage and operation. By default all are selected.
> - Separate sections created in dashboard to see the details of product, stage and operation.
> - Graph showing duration for each stage & operation is added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Dashboard calculates the execution time for the install/upgrade of any product, stage, and operation.
- The status of the install/upgrade for product, stage, and operation are failed or succeeded.
- There is a dropdown for selection of the product, stage, and operation. By default all are selected.
- Separate sections are created in the dashboard to see the details of product, stage, and operation.
- There is a graph showing the duration for each stage and operation.
```

![IUF timing dashboard](../../img/operations/TimingDashboard.png "Timing Dashboard")

## Goss tests for PIT and NCN

### Goss test overview

> Goss test logs are scraped using Grok-exporter and visualization using captured data. CSM-testing repository has Goss-testing with all tests, suites and scripts to execute these Goss tests.

Reviewer 2: grok-exporter is inconsistently capitalized in this document. Is it a proper name that should be capitalized?

Author: Changed it

> Goss test logs are scraped using Grok-exporter and visualization using captured data. CSM-testing repository has Goss-testing with all tests, suites and scripts to execute these Goss tests.

Reviewer 2: If by CSM-testing repository you mean the github `csm-testing` repository, then it should be changed to match that. Although in that case, I would also recommend linking to the repository.

Author: Made the change and added the link to csm-testing repository.

> We are using the automated scripts to run Goss tests in batches. These batches are based on functionality or the check performed in CSM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Automated scripts run the Goss tests in batches. These batches are based on functionality or the check performed in CSM.
```

> The single Goss test is a YAML file and a collection of these Goss tests can be used together by adding them in another YAML file. These suites can be invoked through the script created to get a log file with results for the tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A single Goss test is a YAML file and a collection of these Goss tests can be used together by adding them in another YAML file, called a test suite. These suites can be invoked through the script created to get a log file with results for the tests.
```

For example, a Goss test to validate expected Kubernetes nodes exists using the `kubectl` command based on node names pulled from `/etc/hosts` file. The log files generated from automated scripts that run a set of test suites are used.

> Running the automated scripts using the complete path of script like `/opt/cray/tests/install/ncn/automated/ncn-healthcheck`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to run the automated scripts, use the complete path of the script. For example, `/opt/cray/tests/install/ncn/automated/ncn-healthcheck`.
```

### Workflow

![Goss test workflow](../../img/operations/GossWorkflow.png "Goss Workflow")

### Log file format

Individual lines of logs are in the following format for each node or PIT node, test name, and source:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```json
````

{"log_timestamp": "20230118_094205.821955", "Product": "CSM", "log_script": "print_goss_json_results.py", "log_message": "Test result", "Description": "Validates that 'cray --version' is available and executes successfully on the local system.", "Execution Time (nanoseconds)": 1312368478, "Execution Time (seconds)": 1.312368478, "Node": "ncn-m001", "Result Code": 0, "Result String": "PASS", "Source": "http://ncn-m001.hmn:8997/ncn-healthcheck-master", "Test Name": "Command 'cray --version' Available", "Test Summary": "Command: command_available_1_cray_version: exit-status: matches expectation: [0]"}
```

### Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor

> The deployment for the grok-exporter was created and set the node affinity to `ncn-m001` for NCN deployment of grok-exporter.

Reviewer 2: Why is this past tense?

Author: Changed the sentence tense.

The service for the grok-exporter is created for access at port `9144`. Service-monitor is created for Prometheus to access the metrics that are created by the grok-exporter.

### Configuration file for the grok-exporter

> Created the configuration file for the grok-exporter to parse the Goss test log file and make metrics from them.

Reviewer 2: Why is this past tense?

Author: The tense is changed.

> We are using grok-exporter version 3 configuration for this task and matching log expressions with regular expression.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
grok-exporter version 3 configuration is used for this task and to match log expressions with regular expressions.
```

> The following is the example configuration passed to the grok-exporter to get metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is an example configuration passed to the grok-exporter to get metrics:
```

```bash
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: example_name
  namespace: example_namespace
data:
  config.yml: |-
    global:
      config_version: 3
    input:
      type: file
      paths: 
      - /logs/goss_tests/*
      fail_on_missing_logfile: false
    grok_patterns:
      - 'REGEX [regular].*expression'
      - 'EXAMPLE [aA-zZ-].*'
    metrics:
      - type: gauge
        name: example_metric
        help: EXAMPLE METRIC HELP
        match: '{"log_file": "%{REGEX:logfile}", "TEST": "%{EXAMPLE:ex}"}'
        value: '{{`{{.logfile}}`}}'
        labels:
          example_test: '{{`{{.ex}}`}}'
    server:
     port: 9144
```

### Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard

After the preceding steps the `goss_tests` metrics are seen in Prometheus when Goss tests are run. Using these metrics, Grafana dashboards are created to shows the Goss tests details visually.

Goss test dashboard features:

> - The dashboard as dropdown for product, suite, and tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The dashboard has dropdowns for product, suite, and tests.
```

> - By default, all products, suites and tests are selected for overall Goss tests result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- By default, all products, suites, and tests are selected for overall Goss tests result.
```

- The overall product result, total number of the products, products passed, products failed, and its execution time is seen.
- Suite results and test results are seen from the dashboard.
- Node-wise test result are seen with failed nodes, passed nodes, and the suite/test description.

![Goss test dashboard](../../img/operations/GossTestsDashboard.png "Goss Test Dashboard")

## Error dashboard

> Error dashboards provide key glance insights as to where and what is broken and needs attention. This works for both internal HPE environments and clusters as well as is a containerized shippable solution that customers can use as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Error dashboards provide key at-a-glance insights about what is broken and needs attention. This works for both internal HPE environments and clusters as well as is a containerized shippable solution that customers can use as well.
```

> The automatic generation of the desired Prometheus grok-exporter configuration based upon passing in a set of regular expression patterns to detect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The automatic generation of the desired Prometheus grok-exporter configuration is based upon passing in a set of regular expression patterns to detect.
```

> This includes but is not limited to regular expression patterns to match and generate metrics on phases of manual administrator steps, as well as phases of installation scripts and automation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This includes, but is not limited to, regular expression patterns to match and generate metrics on phases of manual administrator steps, as well as phases of installation scripts and automation.
```

### Error dashboards features

- Automate Grafana dashboards with error and failure message during CSM upgrade and install.
- Create dashboard for issues comparison across multiple dimensions and clusters.

> - Monitor ConMan logs from `csm-pit`.  

Reviewer 2: Does this mean the PIT node?

Reviewer: yes

Reviewer 2: It should use that language then. `csm-pit` indicates a thing literally named `csm-pit`.
```suggestion
- Monitor ConMan logs from the PIT node.
```

Author: Changed csm-pit to PIT node as asked.

> - Grok exporter parse the log files.

Reviewer 2: Should this be grok-exporter?

Author: Changed this to grok-exporter

The automated Time to Install(TTI) and Time to upgrade(TTU) provides us the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install like when and on what machine a given command was run.
This allows us to dynamically capture and store in a file how long the commands/scripts were running, as well what inactivity time was there from the user, as well as how much debug time.

Instead of remembering to notate and record in excel and confluence pages the time spend in actual work, debug, wait time and total time at multiple parts of install for all the product streams, the automated observability time tracking will do this for us.

The following is a list of the most important features of the framework:

- Established a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product streams for install and upgrade observability.
  - Inside-out Views (Timing dashboard view from single operation to complete Product installation details. Goss test dashboard to see test details from single to test to the Suite/ Product.)

>   - Outside-in Views (Timing dashboard view for the complete Product installation details. Goss test dashboard to see test details for the complete Product.)

Author: It means - "You have a timing dashboard view that lets you focus on a single operation, and from that operation zoom out to the total product installation details" for Inside-out and "You have a timing dashboard view that lets you focus on a total product, and from that operation zoom in to the single operation installation details" for Outside-in views.

  - Product stream health

- Drill down health dashboard with roll up.
  - Aggregate checks - Problem/OK counts across each product stream.
  - Functional checks - Product stream functional Goss suites for key areas.
    For example, REST APIs, micro-services, Kubernetes, network, and database health for the specific product stream.
  - Granular checks - Individual Goss tests for component level health checks within a functional area of a given product stream.
    For example, management switch configuration verification, routing table checks on OS, gateway tests, and Container Network Interface (CNI) tests.

- Boot, install, and upgrade duration monitoring.

>   This does automatic calculation and reporting of both the time a given section of install/upgrade has taken, as well as metrics on GOSS tests successes and failures.

Author: Changed.

- Time, node, product stream, capacity, and other dimensions based health and performance insight.

- Multi-interval continuous health checks.

>   The framework defines and implements regular scheduled health checks to occur both during installation and upgrade, as well as after the installation or upgrade has been completed.

Author: Changed.

>   The frequency can be determined by administrator by running the tests over a period of time and selecting the appropriate time interval in the Grafana dashboard to check the results for past six hours, a day, and a week.

Author: Reworded the sentence and just kept the time interval that can be selected by the user. Removed the part about the frequency of how often the tests are run by admin.

> - Automated the deployment, installation, and configuration of the components involved in the Install and Upgrade Observability Framework in a CSM environment.

Reviewer: changed

> - The automatic generation of configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and Key performance indicators (KPIs).

Author: Changed.

>   Providing us the frequency of errors across the complex systems, panels to visualize the outliers, and provides a way to identify the trends in the complex system across different dimensions.

Author: Changed.

The following IUF topics are discussed in the following subsections.

- [Automation of Observability Framework](#automation-of-observability-framework)
  - [Features](#automation-framework-features)
  - [Automation workflow](#automation-workflow)
  - [`systemd` services](#systemd-services)
- [IUF timing dashboard](#iuf-timing-dashboard)
  - [Features](#timing-dashboard-features)
  - [Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow](#prometheus-metrics-using-argo-workflow)
  - [Timing dashboard](#timing-dashboard)

> - [GOSS tests for PIT and NCN](#goss-tests-for-pit-and-ncn)

Author: Changed.

  - [Overview](#goss-test-overview)
  - [Workflow](#workflow)
  - [Log file format](#log-file-format)
  - [Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor](#grok-exporter-deployment-service-and-service-monitor)
  - [Configuration file for the grok-exporter](#configuration-file-for-the-grok-exporter)
  - [Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard](#prometheus-metrics-and-grafana-dashboard)
- [Error dashboard](#error-dashboard)
  - [Features](#error-dashboards-features)
  - [Error dashboards](#error-dashboards)

## Automation of Observability Framework

> Grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana get instantiated automatically on the Combined Install Media LiveCD for PIT.

Author: Changed.

> ### Automation framework features

Reviewer: changed

> - Three different services for Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana will be automatically running once the `pit-init` script is run as a part of PIT node installation.

Reviewer: done

> - Three containers Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana are deployed with services initially on the `csm-pit` remote server for monitoring before other products are installed.

Author: Changed.

> - `Gork-exporter` parse the unstructured data from the log files and create `prometheus` metrics.

Author: Changed.

- Prometheus is used as a time-series database for capturing the metrics.

> - All the Grafana dashboards automatically loads up.

Author: Changed.

### Automation workflow

![Automation framework workflow](../../img/operations/AutomationFrameworkWorkflow.png "Automation framework workflow")

### `systemd` services

> (`pit#`) Running status of `pit-observability` services which includes grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana.

Author: Changed.

> ```bash

Author: Changed.

             └─ 22381 /usr/bin/conmon --api-version 1 -c 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb29eb7cf1064dc159c9ae66 -u 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd6973>

Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:             "IOMaximumBandwidth": 0,
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:             "CgroupConf": null
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:         }
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:     }
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]: ]
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: 2023-01-25 00:04:36.016806447 +0000 UTC m=+0.306557966 container init 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb2>
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: 2023-01-25 00:04:36.07000859 +0000 UTC m=+0.359760105 container start 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb2>
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: grok-exporter
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit grok-exporter[22381]: Starting server on http://redbull-pit:9144/metrics
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit systemd[1]: Started Grok-exporter.
```

> ```bash

Author: Changed.

Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=main.go:1214 level=info msg="Completed loading of configuration file" file>
Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=main.go:957 level=info msg="Server is ready to receive web requests."
Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=manager.go:937 level=info component="rule manager" msg="Starting rule mana>
Jan 25 03:06:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T03:06:09.240Z caller=compact.go:519 level=info component=tsdb msg="write block" mint=1674605167>
Jan 25 03:06:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T03:06:09.242Z caller=head.go:840 level=info component=tsdb msg="Head GC completed" duration=1.3>
Jan 25 05:00:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T05:00:09.261Z caller=compact.go:519 level=info component=tsdb msg="write block" mint=1674612007>
Jan 25 05:00:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T05:00:09.263Z caller=head.go:840 level=info component=tsdb msg="Head GC completed" duration=1.7
```

> ```bash

Author: Changed.

Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=live.push_http t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.44+0000 lvl=info msg="Live Push Gateway initialization"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=grafanaStorageLogger t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="storage starting"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="warming cache for startup"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert.multiorg.alertmanager t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="starting MultiOrg Alertmanager"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=http.server t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.55+0000 lvl=info msg="HTTP Server Listen" address=[::]:3000 protocol=http>
```

## IUF timing dashboard

### Timing dashboard features

- Use Argo workflows to collect the install/upgrade timing details.
- Create Argo workflows to get metrics from the details available.
- Generate Prometheus install/upgrade timing metrics.
- Create Grafana dashboard using Prometheus metrics.

### Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow

> We will be able to get the start time and end time as Prometheus labels for the operations using Argo metrics implementation.

Author: Changed.

> We have added record time stamp task at the beginning and end of the operation template using timestamp output parameter as an input to the metrics.

Author: No, this is not important. I have made this change and there is no mention of the template.

> Metrics that will be captured for the operations:

Author: Changed.

- start time
- end time
- duration
- status
- product name
- product version

> Metrics that will be captured for the stage:

Author: Changed.

- stage name
- stage type

> - stage start time (derived from min of start time of the all the operations presented in the stage)

Author: Changed.

> - stage end time (derived from max of start time of the all the operations presented in the stage)

Author: Changed.

> - stage duration (stage end time - stage start time)

Author: Changed.

> - stage status (derived from all the operations statuses)

Author: Derived from operation statuses. Added 'status is marked as succeeded if all the operations' statuses are succeeded and vice versa' instead of this.

> Metrics that will be captured for the product:

Author: Changed.

- product name

> - product start time (derived from the start time of the process-media stage)

Author: Exactly the start time. Changed this to the start time of the process-media stage.

> - product end time (derived from the start time of the post-install-check stage)

Author: Exactly the start time. Changed this to the start time of the post-install-check stage.

> - product status (derived from the status of the stage)

Author: Added 'status is marked as succeeded if all the stages' statuses are succeeded and vice versa' instead of this.

### Timing dashboard

> - Dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard to track install/upgrade status of any product, stage and operation.

Author: Changed.

- Dashboard calculates the execution time for the install/upgrade of any product, stage, and operation.
- The status of the install/upgrade for product, stage, and operation are failed or succeeded.
- There is a dropdown for selection of the product, stage, and operation. By default all are selected.
- Separate sections are created in the dashboard to see the details of product, stage, and operation.
- There is a graph showing the duration for each stage and operation is added.

![IUF timing dashboard](../../img/operations/TimingDashboard.png "Timing Dashboard")

## Goss tests for PIT and NCN

### Goss test overview

> The observability tooling will monitor the logs for Goss tests run by using the automated scripts.

Author: Changed.

> These scripts are regularly run during install/upgrade and generate metrics on how long each Goss test takes and the success and failure response of each Goss test.

Author: Changed.

> This framework gives us a set of quantifiable metrics we have further used to create our visual Grafana health dashboard of all environments.

Author: Changed.

> From this we will be able to capture significant insight on which tests fail most, which clusters have the most problems.

Author: Changed.

> From this we will be able to capture significant insight on which tests fail most, which clusters have the most problems.

Reviewer 2: But this makes it sound like the single dashboard will show information for multiple Kubernetes clusters. Is that true? I thought each CSM system would have its own Grafana dashboards, and they would only show information for the K8s cluster of that system. Is that not right?

Or when this says "single Grafana health dashboard of all environments", does that truly mean multiple different CSM systems?

> Trend analysis of this data in Grafana across different dimensions will point out statistically where in the service we see the most fragility, the highest frequency of issues.

Author: Changed.

> It also gives us an, at a glance dashboard where an administrator can visually see the complete health, with drill down from the aggregate view of the environment to the functional areas, to the components.

Author: Changed.

> Goss test logs are scraped using grok-exporter and visualization using captured data. [`csm-testing` repository](https://github.com/Cray-HPE/csm-testing/tree/main/goss-testing/) has Goss-testing with all tests, suites and scripts to execute these Goss tests.

Author: Changed.

> Goss test logs are scraped using grok-exporter and visualization using captured data. [`csm-testing` repository](https://github.com/Cray-HPE/csm-testing/tree/main/goss-testing/) has Goss-testing with all tests, suites and scripts to execute these Goss tests.

Author: Yes, we want customers to see the scripts present and the tests available for them to run. If all or some of these tests are not available it the node path then they can add them and run them.

> Goss test logs are scraped using grok-exporter and visualization using captured data. [`csm-testing` repository](https://github.com/Cray-HPE/csm-testing/tree/main/goss-testing/) has Goss-testing with all tests, suites and scripts to execute these Goss tests.

Reviewer 2: But we don't provide them any way of knowing how to find the correct latest version for their system. They wouldn't want to just grab the latest from the main branch. If we're going to point them to the repository for this purpose, we need to also provide additional guidance in that regard.

Automated scripts run the Goss tests in batches. These batches are based on functionality or the check performed in CSM.

> A single Goss test is a YAML file and a collection of these Goss tests can be used together by adding them in another YAML file, called a test suite. These suites can be invoked through the script created to get a log file with results for the tests.

Author: Added "through the CSM-provided scripts" instead of "through the script created"

In order to run the automated scripts, use the complete path of the script. For example, `/opt/cray/tests/install/ncn/automated/ncn-healthcheck`.

### Workflow

![Goss test workflow](../../img/operations/GossWorkflow.png "Goss Workflow")

### Log file format

Individual lines of logs are in the following format for each node or PIT node, test name, and source:

```json
{"log_timestamp": "20230118_094205.821955", "Product": "CSM", "log_script": "print_goss_json_results.py", "log_message": "Test result", "Description": "Validates that 'cray --version' is available and executes successfully on the local system.", "Execution Time (nanoseconds)": 1312368478, "Execution Time (seconds)": 1.312368478, "Node": "ncn-m001", "Result Code": 0, "Result String": "PASS", "Source": "http://ncn-m001.hmn:8997/ncn-healthcheck-master", "Test Name": "Command 'cray --version' Available", "Test Summary": "Command: command_available_1_cray_version: exit-status: matches expectation: [0]"}
```

### Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor

> The deployment for the grok-exporter is for all the master nodes by setting the node affinity as `ncn-m001`, `ncn-m002`, and `ncn-m003` for NCN deployment of grok-exporter.

Author: Changed.

The service for the grok-exporter is accessible at port `9144`. Service-monitor implementation is for Prometheus to access the metrics that are created by the grok-exporter.

### Configuration file for the grok-exporter

> The configuration file for the grok-exporter parses the Goss test log file and creates metrics from them.

Author: Changed.

grok-exporter version 3 configuration is used for this task and to match log expressions with regular expressions.

The following is an example configuration passed to the grok-exporter to get metrics:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: example_name
  namespace: example_namespace
data:
  config.yml: |-
    global:
      config_version: 3
    input:
      type: file
      paths: 
      - /logs/goss_tests/*
      fail_on_missing_logfile: false
    grok_patterns:
      - 'REGEX [regular].*expression'
      - 'EXAMPLE [aA-zZ-].*'
    metrics:
      - type: gauge
        name: example_metric
        help: EXAMPLE METRIC HELP
        match: '{"log_file": "%{REGEX:logfile}", "TEST": "%{EXAMPLE:ex}"}'
        value: '{{`{{.logfile}}`}}'
        labels:
          example_test: '{{`{{.ex}}`}}'
    server:
     port: 9144
```

### Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard

After the preceding steps the `goss_tests` metrics are seen in Prometheus when Goss tests are run. Using these metrics, Grafana dashboards are created to shows the Goss tests details visually.

Goss test dashboard features:

> - The dashboard has dropdown for product, suite, and tests.

Author: Changed.

- By default, all products, suites, and tests are selected for overall Goss tests result.
- The overall product result, total number of the products, products passed, products failed, and its execution time is seen.
- Suite results and test results are seen from the dashboard.

> - Node-wise test result are seen with failed nodes, passed nodes, and the suite/test description.

Author: Changed.

![Goss test dashboard](../../img/operations/GossTestsDashboard.png "Goss Test Dashboard")

## Error dashboard

> Error dashboards provide key glance at-a-insights about what is broken and needs attention. This works for both internal HPE environments and clusters as well as is a containerized shippable solution that customers can use as well.

Reviewer 2: Isn't it assumed by default that our metrics work both internally and on customer deployments, unless we say otherwise? Or am I missing a subtlety here?
```suggestion
Error dashboards provide key glance at-a-insights about what is broken and needs attention.
```

Author: Changed.

The automatic generation of the desired Prometheus grok-exporter configuration is based upon passing in a set of regular expression patterns to detect.
This includes, but is not limited to, regular expression patterns to match and generate metrics on phases of manual administrator steps, as well as phases of installation scripts and automation.

### Error dashboards features

- Automate Grafana dashboards with error and failure message during CSM upgrade and install.
- Create dashboard for issues comparison across multiple dimensions and clusters.
- Monitor ConMan logs from `csm-pit`.  

> - grok-exporter parse the log files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Grok-exporter parses the log files.
```

Author: Changed.

- Create the Trend, Error, and Alert frequency dashboard.

### Error dashboards

> Dashboard tracking different types of errors during install/upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dashboards tracking different types of errors during install/upgrade.
```

Author: Changed.

The automated Time to Install(TTI) and Time to upgrade(TTU) provides us the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install like when and on what machine a given command was run.
This allows us to dynamically capture and store in a file how long the commands/scripts were running, as well what inactivity time was there from the user, as well as how much debug time.

Instead of remembering to notate and record in excel and confluence pages the time spend in actual work, debug, wait time and total time at multiple parts of install for all the product streams, the automated observability time tracking will do this for us.

The following is a list of the most important features of the framework:

- Established a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product streams for install and upgrade observability.
  - Inside-out Views
    - Timing dashboard view that lets us focus on a single operation, and from that operation zoom out to the total product installation details.
    - Goss test dashboard view that lets us focus on a single test, and from that test zoom out to the total product test details.
  - Outside-in Views

>     - Timing dashboard view that shows total product details, and from that we can zoom in to focus on single operation installation details.
>     - Goss test dashboard view that shows total product test details, and from that we can zoom in to focus on single test details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Timing dashboard view that shows total product details, and from that zoom in to focus on details of a single installation operation.
    - Goss test dashboard view that shows total product test details, and from that zoom in to focus on details of a single test.
```

>     - Goss test dashboard view that shows total product test details, and from that we can zoom in to focus on single test details.

Author: Changed

  - Product stream health

- Drill down health dashboard with roll up.
  - Aggregate checks - Problem/OK counts across each product stream.
  - Functional checks - Product stream functional Goss suites for key areas.
    For example, REST APIs, micro-services, Kubernetes, network, and database health for the specific product stream.
  - Granular checks - Individual Goss tests for component level health checks within a functional area of a given product stream.
    For example, management switch configuration verification, routing table checks on OS, gateway tests, and Container Network Interface (CNI) tests.

- Boot, install, and upgrade duration monitoring.
  This does automatic calculation and reporting of both the time a given section of install/upgrade has taken, as well as metrics on Goss test successes and failures.

- Time, node, product stream, capacity, and other dimensions based health and performance insight.

- Multi-interval continuous health checks.
  This defines and implements regular scheduled health checks to occur both during and after the installation and upgrade.

>   We can select the appropriate time interval in the Grafana dashboard to check the results for past six hours, a day, and a week.

Author: changed

> - Automate the Observability framework , installation, and configuration of the components involved in the Install and Upgrade Observability Framework in a CSM environment.

Reviewer: yes, correct

> - Automate the Observability framework , installation, and configuration of the components involved in the Install and Upgrade Observability Framework in a CSM environment.

Reviewer 2: In that case, it doesn't seem like it is a feature of the framework itself, so it feels out of place in this list. But if it is going to be present, it should be reworded at least.

```suggestion
- The framework is automatically configured and run in CSM, even during installation and upgrade of CSM itself.
```

> - Automate the Observability framework , installation, and configuration of the components involved in the Install and Upgrade Observability Framework in a CSM environment.

Author: changed.

- The automatic generation of configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).
  These dashboards show the frequency of errors across the complex systems, include panels to visualize the outliers, and provide a way to identify the trends in the complex system across different dimensions.

The following IUF topics are discussed in the following subsections.

> - [Automation of Observability Framework](#automation-of-observability-framework)
>   - [Features](#observability-framework-features)
>   - [Observability workflow](#observability-workflow)
>   - [`systemd` services](#systemd-services)
> - [IUF timing dashboard](#iuf-timing-dashboard)
>   - [Features](#timing-dashboard-features)
>   - [Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow](#prometheus-metrics-using-argo-workflow)
>   - [Timing dashboard](#timing-dashboard)
> - [Goss tests for PIT and NCN](#goss-tests-for-pit-and-ncn)
>   - [Overview](#goss-test-overview)
>   - [Workflow](#workflow)
>   - [Log file format](#log-file-format)
>   - [Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor](#grok-exporter-deployment-service-and-service-monitor)
>   - [Configuration file for the grok-exporter](#configuration-file-for-the-grok-exporter)
>   - [Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard](#prometheus-metrics-and-grafana-dashboard)
> - [Error dashboard](#error-dashboard)
>   - [Features](#error-dashboards-features)
>   - [Error dashboards](#error-dashboards)
> 
> ## Automation of Observability Framework

Reviewer 2: This first section really seems like it is talking about the Observability Framework on the PIT node. It appears to be explaining that the framework is automatically there on the PIT node, and shows the services that are running as part of it. 

Therefore, I suggest changing the name of the section to make that clearer. Please let me know if I am misunderstanding the intent of this first section.

```suggestion
- [Observability Framework during CSM installs](#observability-framework-during-csm-installs)
  - [Overview](#overview-of-observability-framework-on-pit-node)
  - [Observability workflow](#observability-framework-workflow-on-pit-node)
  - [`systemd` services](#observability-framework-systemd-services-on-pit-node)
- [IUF timing dashboard](#iuf-timing-dashboard)
  - [Features](#timing-dashboard-features)
  - [Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow](#prometheus-metrics-using-argo-workflow)
  - [Timing dashboard](#timing-dashboard)
- [Goss tests for PIT and NCN](#goss-tests-for-pit-and-ncn)
  - [Overview](#goss-test-overview)
  - [Workflow](#workflow)
  - [Log file format](#log-file-format)
  - [Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor](#grok-exporter-deployment-service-and-service-monitor)
  - [Configuration file for the grok-exporter](#configuration-file-for-the-grok-exporter)
  - [Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard](#prometheus-metrics-and-grafana-dashboard)
- [Error dashboard](#error-dashboard)
  - [Features](#error-dashboards-features)
  - [Error dashboards](#error-dashboards)

## Observability Framework during CSM installs
```

Author: changed

> Grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana are instantiated automatically on the PIT node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Observability Framework is available during CSM installs once the PIT node is booted and initially configured.
```

Author: changed

> ### Observability framework features

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Overview of Observability Framework on PIT node
```

> - Three different services for Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana will be automatically running as a part of PIT node installation.
> - Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana containers are deployed with services initially on the PIT node for monitoring before other products are installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Three different services (Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana) are automatically started on the PIT node as part of its initial configuration.
  These services provide monitoring before other products are installed.
```

- Grok-exporter parses the unstructured data from the log files and creates Prometheus metrics.
- Prometheus is used as a time-series database for capturing the metrics.
- All the Grafana dashboards automatically load up.

> ### Observability workflow
> 
> ![Observability framework workflow](../../img/operations/AutomationFrameworkWorkflow.png "Observability framework workflow")
> 
> ### `systemd` services

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Observability Framework workflow on PIT node

![Observability Framework workflow on PIT node](../../img/operations/AutomationFrameworkWorkflow.png "Observability Framework workflow on PIT node")

### Observability Framework `systemd` services on PIT node
```

Author: changed

> Running status of the PIT observability services: grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If problems are suspected with the Observability Framework during a CSM install, an administrator may that the
grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana services are running properly on the PIT node.
```

Author: This change request is not correct. The sentence is partial.

> Running status of the PIT observability services: grok-exporter, Prometheus, and Grafana.
> 
> ```text

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
#### Check grok-exporter service

(`pit#`) Run the following command in order to show the status of the grok-exporter service.

```bash
systemctl status grok-exporter.service
```

Example output of the service running properly on a PIT node:

```text
````

             └─ 22381 /usr/bin/conmon --api-version 1 -c 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb29eb7cf1064dc159c9ae66 -u 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd6973>

Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:             "IOMaximumBandwidth": 0,
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:             "CgroupConf": null
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:         }
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]:     }
Jan 25 00:04:35 redbull-pit grok-exporter.sh[22276]: ]
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: 2023-01-25 00:04:36.016806447 +0000 UTC m=+0.306557966 container init 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb2>
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: 2023-01-25 00:04:36.07000859 +0000 UTC m=+0.359760105 container start 75b89abbe71f1d55033e42305dd69735f952b8b3eb2>
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit podman[22324]: grok-exporter
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit grok-exporter[22381]: Starting server on http://redbull-pit:9144/metrics
Jan 25 00:04:36 redbull-pit systemd[1]: Started Grok-exporter.
```

> ```text

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
#### Check Prometheus service

(`pit#`) Run the following command in order to show the status of the Prometheus service.

```bash
systemctl status prometheus.service
```

Example output of the service running properly on a PIT node:

```text
````

Author: changed.

Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=main.go:1214 level=info msg="Completed loading of configuration file" file>
Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=main.go:957 level=info msg="Server is ready to receive web requests."
Jan 25 00:05:47 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T00:05:47.052Z caller=manager.go:937 level=info component="rule manager" msg="Starting rule mana>
Jan 25 03:06:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T03:06:09.240Z caller=compact.go:519 level=info component=tsdb msg="write block" mint=1674605167>
Jan 25 03:06:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T03:06:09.242Z caller=head.go:840 level=info component=tsdb msg="Head GC completed" duration=1.3>
Jan 25 05:00:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T05:00:09.261Z caller=compact.go:519 level=info component=tsdb msg="write block" mint=1674612007>
Jan 25 05:00:09 redbull-pit prometheus[25680]: ts=2023-01-25T05:00:09.263Z caller=head.go:840 level=info component=tsdb msg="Head GC completed" duration=1.7
```

> ```text

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
#### Check Grafana service

(`pit#`) Run the following command in order to show the status of the Grafana service.

```bash
systemctl status grafana.service
```

Example output of the service running properly on a PIT node:

```text
````

Author: changed.

Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=http.server t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.55+0000 lvl=info msg="HTTP Server Listen" address=[::]:3000 protocol=http>
```

## IUF timing dashboard

### Timing dashboard features

- Use Argo workflows to collect the install/upgrade timing details.
- Create Argo workflows to get metrics from the details available.
- Generate Prometheus install/upgrade timing metrics.
- Create Grafana dashboard using Prometheus metrics.

### Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow

The start time and end time can be obtained as Prometheus labels for the operations using Argo metrics implementation. The time stamp is recorded at the beginning and end of each operation.

Metrics that are captured for the operations:

- start time
- end time
- duration
- status
- product name
- product version

Metrics that are captured for the stage:

- stage name
- stage type
- stage start time (the earliest start time of the all the operations in the stage)
- stage end time (the latest end time of the all the operations in the stage)
- stage duration (the difference between the stage end time and stage start time)

> - stage status (status is marked as succeeded if all the operations' statuses are succeeded and vice versa)

Reviewer 2: Is this accurate?
```suggestion
- stage status (status is marked as succeeded if all the operations' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)
```

Author: changed.

Metrics that are captured for the product:

- product name
- product start time (start time of the process-media stage)

> - product end time (start time of the post-install-check stage)

Reviewer 2: Is the product end time supposed to be the end time of the post-install-check stage? Or is it actually the start time of the post-install-check stage, as written?

Author: Yes, it is right. product end time is actually the start time of the post-install-check stage, as written.

> - product status (status is marked as succeeded if all the stages' statuses are succeeded and vice versa)

Reviewer 2: Is this accurate?

```suggestion
- product status (status is marked as succeeded if all the stages' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)
```

Author: changed.

### Timing dashboard

- Dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard to track install/upgrade status of any product, stage, and operation.
- Dashboard calculates the execution time for the install/upgrade of any product, stage, and operation.
- The status of the install/upgrade for product, stage, and operation are failed or succeeded.
- There is a dropdown for selection of the product, stage, and operation. By default all are selected.

>   The framework defines and implements regular scheduled health checks to occur both during installation and upgrade, as well as after the installation or upgrade has been completed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The framework defines and implements periodic scheduled health checks to occur both during and after installation or upgrade.
```

Author: changed

>   The frequency can be determined by administrator by running the tests over a period of time and selecting the appropriate time interval in the Grafana dashboard to check the results for past six hours, a day, and a week.

Reviewer 2: This should be re-worded the same way that it was for this comment:
https://github.com/Cray-HPE/docs-csm/pull/3359#discussion_r1120466739

Author: changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The Grafana dashboard also allows administrators to view results only for specific time periods -- the past six hours, a day, or a week.
```

Goss test logs are scraped using grok-exporter and visualized on Grafana using captured data.
[`csm-testing` repository](https://github.com/Cray-HPE/csm-testing/tree/main/goss-testing/) contains all of the tests, suites, and scripts to execute these Goss tests.
Automated scripts run the Goss tests in batches. These batches are based on functionality or the check performed in CSM.

A single Goss test is a YAML file and a collection of these Goss tests can be used together by adding them in another YAML file, called a test suite. These suites can be invoked through the CSM-provided scripts to get a log file with results for the tests.

For example, a Goss test to validate expected Kubernetes nodes exists using the `kubectl` command based on node names pulled from `/etc/hosts` file. The log files generated from automated scripts that run a set of test suites are used.

In order to run the automated scripts, use the complete path of the script. For example, `/opt/cray/tests/install/ncn/automated/ncn-healthcheck`.

### Workflow

![Goss test workflow](../../img/operations/GossWorkflow.png "Goss Workflow")

### Log file format

> Individual lines of logs are in the following format for each node or PIT node, test name, and source:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Individual lines of logs are in the following format for each node, test name, and source:
```

Author: changed

```json

> {"log_timestamp": "20230118_094205.821955", "Product": "CSM", "log_script": "print_goss_json_results.py", "log_message": "Test result", "Description": "Validates that 'cray --version' is available and executes successfully on the local system.", "Execution Time (nanoseconds)": 1312368478, "Execution Time (seconds)": 1.312368478, "Node": "ncn-m001", "Result Code": 0, "Result String": "PASS", "Source": "http://ncn-m001.hmn:8997/ncn-healthcheck-master", "Test Name": "Command 'cray --version' Available", "Test Summary": "Command: command_available_1_cray_version: exit-status: matches expectation: [0]"}

Reviewer 3: The changes I had added were reverted again, this is one-line again.

Reviewer 3: I've cherry-picked my old commit back, please `git fetch && git pull` before making more changes to prevent these from getting lost.

Author: sure, performed git fetch && git pull

grok-exporter version 3 configuration is used for this task and to match log expressions with regular expressions.

The following is an example configuration passed to the grok-exporter to get metrics:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: example_name
  namespace: example_namespace
data:
  config.yml: |-
    global:
      config_version: 3
    input:
      type: file
      paths: 
      - /logs/goss_tests/*
      fail_on_missing_logfile: false
    grok_patterns:
      - 'REGEX [regular].*expression'
      - 'EXAMPLE [aA-zZ-].*'
    metrics:
      - type: gauge
        name: example_metric
        help: EXAMPLE METRIC HELP
        match: '{"log_file": "%{REGEX:logfile}", "TEST": "%{EXAMPLE:ex}"}'
        value: '{{`{{.logfile}}`}}'
        labels:
          example_test: '{{`{{.ex}}`}}'
    server:
     port: 9144
```

### Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard

After the preceding steps the `goss_tests` metrics are seen in Prometheus when Goss tests are run. Using these metrics, Grafana dashboards are created to shows the Goss tests details visually.

Goss test dashboard features:

> - The dashboard has a dropdown for product, suite, and tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The dashboard has a dropdown for products, suites, and tests.
```

Author: changed

# Install and Upgrade Observability Framework

## Overview

The Install and Upgrade Observability Framework collects Goss test health check results and presents them in a visual Grafana dashboard, providing key insights into the health of the system.

> The automated Time to Install (TTI) and Time to Upgrade (TTU) provide the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install, such as when and on what machine a given command was run.

Reviewer 4: It sounds like a word is missing here after ```(TTU)```.  Does ```...and Time to Upgrade (TTU) features provide the``` make sense?

> The automated Time to Install (TTI) and Time to Upgrade (TTU) provide the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install, such as when and on what machine a given command was run.

Reviewer 4: Should ```HPC install``` be ```CSM install```?

> For install of each product stream, the observability framework records the time spent in actual work, debugging, and waiting, as well as the total duration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For installs of each product stream, the observability framework records the time spent executing the install, debugging, waiting, as well as the total time duration.
```

The following is a list of the most important features of the framework:

- Provides a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product stream  installs and upgrades.
  - Inside-out views
    - Timing dashboard view that focuses on a single operation, and from that operation an administrator can zoom out to view the total product installation details.
    - Goss test dashboard view that focuses on a single test, and from that test an administrator can zoom out to view the total product test details.
  - Outside-in views
    - Timing dashboard view that shows total product details, and from that view an administrator can zoom in to focus on details of a single installation operation.
    - Goss test dashboard view that shows total product test details, and from that view an administrator can zoom in to focus on details of a single test.

>   - Product stream health

Reviewer 4: Seems like this should have a one-line description like the other features above do.

> - Drill down health dashboard with roll up.

Reviewer 4: What does ```roll up``` mean?  A roll up summary of health?  Might be good to clarify that.

  - Aggregate checks
    - Problem/OK counts across each product stream.
  - Functional checks

>     - Product stream functional Goss suites for key areas.

Reviewer 4: Does the framework provide these product stream test suites, or are they provided by the product streams and the framework allows the results to be reported/summarized nicely for the admin?  If the latter, it would be good to make that clear as this sentence reads like the framework is providing the product stream suites.

>     - For example: REST APIs, micro-services, Kubernetes, network, and database health for the specific product stream.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - For example: REST API, micro-service, Kubernetes, network, and database health checks for a specific product stream.
```

  - Granular checks
    - Individual Goss tests for component level health checks within a functional area of a given product stream.
    - For example: management switch configuration verification, routing table checks on the OS, gateway tests, and Container Network Interface (CNI) tests.

- Boot, install, and upgrade duration monitoring.

>   This does automatic calculation and reporting of both the time a given section of install/upgrade has taken, as well as metrics on Goss test successes and failures.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  This does automatic calculating and reporting of the time a given section of install/upgrade has taken as well as metrics on Goss test successes and failures.
```

- [Goss tests for PIT and NCN](#goss-tests-for-pit-and-ncn)
  - [Overview](#goss-test-overview)
  - [Workflow](#workflow)
  - [Log file format](#log-file-format)
  - [Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor](#grok-exporter-deployment-service-and-service-monitor)
  - [Configuration file for the grok-exporter](#configuration-file-for-the-grok-exporter)
  - [Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard](#prometheus-metrics-and-grafana-dashboard)
- [Error dashboard](#error-dashboard)
  - [Features](#error-dashboards-features)
  - [Error dashboards](#error-dashboards)

## Observability Framework during CSM installs

The Observability Framework is available during CSM installs once the PIT node is booted and initially configured.

### Overview of Observability Framework on PIT node

- Three different services (Prometheus, grok-exporter, and Grafana) are automatically started on the PIT node as part of its initial configuration.
  These services provide monitoring before other products are installed.
- Grok-exporter parses the unstructured data from the log files and creates Prometheus metrics.
- Prometheus is used as a time-series database for capturing the metrics.

> - All the Grafana dashboards automatically load up.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- All Grafana dashboards are automatically configured.
```

> - All the Grafana dashboards automatically load up.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- All Grafana dashboards are automatically configured.
```

### Observability Framework workflow on PIT node

![Observability Framework workflow on PIT node](../../img/operations/AutomationFrameworkWorkflow.png "Observability Framework workflow on PIT node")

### Observability Framework `systemd` services on PIT node

#### Check grok-exporter service

> (`pit#`) Run the following command in order to show the status of the grok-exporter service.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(`pit#`) Run the following command in order to show the status of the `grok-exporter` service.
```

Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=migrator t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.26+0000 lvl=info msg="migrations completed" performed=0 skipped=393 durati>
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=plugin.manager t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.42+0000 lvl=info msg="Plugin registered" pluginId=input
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=query_data t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.43+0000 lvl=info msg="Query Service initialization"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=live.push_http t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.44+0000 lvl=info msg="Live Push Gateway initialization"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=grafanaStorageLogger t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="storage starting"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="warming cache for startup"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert.multiorg.alertmanager t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="starting MultiOrg Alertmanager"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=http.server t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.55+0000 lvl=info msg="HTTP Server Listen" address=[::]:3000 protocol=http>
```

## IUF timing dashboard

> The IUF Timing dashboard provides timing information for installs and upgrades.

Reviewer 4: Should ```Timing``` be capitalized here?  It is not in other areas so I am not sure the intent.

### Timing dashboard features

- Dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard to track install/upgrade status of any product, stage, and operation.

> - Dashboard calculates the duration for the install/upgrade of any product, stage, and operation.

Reviewer 4: Both lines seem to be saying the same thing.  Can one be deleted?

Reviewer 4: I see now that the second line mentions duration, so I guess they are different.  Given the similarities, perhaps this will summarize them both in a single line:
```A dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard that tracks install/upgrade status and duration for any product, stage, and operation.```

- Product timing metrics
  - Product name
  - Product start time (start time of the process-media stage)
  - Product end time (start time of the post-install-check stage)
  - Product status (status is marked as succeeded if all the stages' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)

## Goss tests for PIT and NCN

### Goss test overview

The observability tooling monitors the logs for Goss tests run by using the automated scripts. These scripts are regularly run during install/upgrade. For each Goss test, metrics are generated on its duration and success or failure.

This framework provides a set of quantifiable metrics used to create a visual Grafana health dashboard of all environments. This provides administrators with insight on which areas are experiencing problems.

Trend analysis of this data in Grafana across different dimensions may point out statistically where the highest frequency of issues occurs.
It also provides administrators an at-a-glance dashboard where they can visually see the complete system health. This includes the option to drill down from the aggregate view of the environment to the functional areas or the components.

> Goss test logs are scraped using grok-exporter and visualized on Grafana using captured data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Goss test logs are scraped using `grok-exporter` and visualized on Grafana using captured data.
```

Goss tests are contained in YAML file. A YAML file containing a list of Goss test files is called a test suite. These suites are run through the CSM-provided scripts to get a log file with results for the tests.

### Workflow

![Goss test workflow](../../img/operations/GossWorkflow.png "Goss Workflow")

### Log file format

> Individual lines of logs are in the following format for each node, test name, and source:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Log file entries for each node, test name, and source are stored in the following format:
```

```json
{
  "log_timestamp": "20230118_094205.821955",
  "Product": "CSM",
  "log_script": "print_goss_json_results.py",
  "log_message": "Test result",
  "Description": "Validates that 'cray --version' is available and executes successfully on the local system.",
  "Execution Time (nanoseconds)": 1312368478,
  "Execution Time (seconds)": 1.312368478,
  "Node": "ncn-m001",
  "Result Code": 0,
  "Result String": "PASS",
  "Source": "http://ncn-m001.hmn:8997/ncn-healthcheck-master",
  "Test Name": "Command 'cray --version' Available",
  "Test Summary": "Command: command_available_1_cray_version: exit-status: matches expectation: [0]"
}
```

### Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor

> Grok-exporter is deployed on all of the Kubernetes master nodes, by using node affinity in its deployment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Grok-exporter is deployed on all of the Kubernetes master nodes using Kubernetes node affinity.
```

> As background information, the service for the grok-exporter is accessible at port `9144` and service-monitor implementation is for Prometheus to access the metrics that are created by the grok-exporter.

Reviewer 4: Is ````service-monitor``` related to the grok-exporter accessible at port 9144?  I am a little confused how these two points in this sentence are related.

### Configuration file for the grok-exporter

> The configuration file for the grok-exporter provides instructions on how to parse the Goss test log files and creates metrics from them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The configuration file for the grok-exporter provides instructions on how to parse the Goss test log files and create metrics from them.
```

grok-exporter version 3 configuration is used for this task and to match log expressions with regular expressions.

The following is an example configuration passed to the grok-exporter to get metrics:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: example_name
  namespace: example_namespace
data:
  config.yml: |-
    global:
      config_version: 3
    input:
      type: file
      paths: 
      - /logs/goss_tests/*
      fail_on_missing_logfile: false
    grok_patterns:
      - 'REGEX [regular].*expression'
      - 'EXAMPLE [aA-zZ-].*'
    metrics:
      - type: gauge
        name: example_metric
        help: EXAMPLE METRIC HELP
        match: '{"log_file": "%{REGEX:logfile}", "TEST": "%{EXAMPLE:ex}"}'
        value: '{{`{{.logfile}}`}}'
        labels:
          example_test: '{{`{{.ex}}`}}'
    server:
     port: 9144
```

### Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard

> After the preceding steps the `goss_tests` metrics are seen in Prometheus when Goss tests are run. Using these metrics,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After the preceding steps, the `goss_tests` metrics are seen in Prometheus when Goss tests are run. Using these metrics,
```

> Grafana dashboards are created to shows the Goss tests details visually.

Reviewer 4: Once configured as described in the preceding section, the `goss_tests` metrics are displayed in Prometheus whenever Goss tests are run.  Grafana dashboards are created and use these metrics to display the Goss test details visually.

Goss test dashboard features:

> - The dashboard has a dropdown for products, suites, and tests.

Reviewer 4: Dropdown menu?

> - By default, all products, suites, and tests are selected for overall Goss tests result.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- By default, all products, suites, and tests are selected for overall Goss test results.
```

> - The overall product result, total number of the products, products passed, products failed, and its execution time is seen.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The overall product result, total number of products, products passed, products failed, and execution time is displayed.
```

> - Suite results and test results are seen from the dashboard.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Suite results and test results are displayed on the dashboard.
```

> - Node-wise test results are seen with failed nodes, passed nodes, and the suite/test description.

Reviewer 4: Is this supposed to be ```node-wide``` or perhaps ```per-node```?  I am not sure what ```node-wise``` means.

![Goss test dashboard](../../img/operations/GossTestsDashboard.png "Goss Test Dashboard")

## Error dashboard

> Error dashboards provide key glance at-a-insights about what is broken and needs attention.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Error dashboards provide key at-a-glance insights about what is broken and needs attention.
```

Error dashboards have data such as total count of errors, warnings, failure, not responding, pool allocation failed, DHCP errors, etc across all the `ncns` during `csm` installation process.

### Error dashboards features

- The error dashboards provide the ability to examine errors in the cluster across multiple dimensions.
- The error dashboards pull in information from a variety of sources, including the following:

>   - Error and failures encountered during upgrades and installs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Errors and failures encountered during upgrades and installs.
```

  - ConMan logs on the PIT node.
  - Goss test logs.

### Error dashboards

Dashboards tracking different types of errors during install/upgrade.

> - Frequency of message about known issues dashboard

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Frequency of messages about known issues dashboard
```

- CSM install progress dashboard

> - USB Device error tracking dashboard

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- USB device error tracking dashboard
```

# Install and Upgrade Observability Framework

## Overview

> The Install and Upgrade Observability Framework includes Goss tests health check results in visual Grafana dashboard providing key insights into the health of an HPC from the simple components to the functional and aggregate view of health.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Install and Upgrade Observability Framework includes Goss test health check results in a visual Grafana dashboard, providing key insights into the health of the system, from simple components to a functional and aggregate view of health.
```

Author: changed.

> The automated Time to Install(TTI) and Time to upgrade(TTU) provides us the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install like when and on what machine a given command was run.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The automated Time to Install (TTI) and Time to Upgrade (TTU) provides us the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install like when and on what machine a given command was run.
```

Author: changed

This allows us to dynamically capture and store in a file how long the commands/scripts were running, as well what inactivity time was there from the user, as well as how much debug time.

> Instead of remembering to notate and record in excel and confluence pages the time spend in actual work, debug, wait time and total time at multiple parts of install for all the product streams, the automated observability time tracking will do this for us.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The automated observability time tracking will record the time spent in actual work, debug, wait time, and total time at multiple parts of install for all the product streams.
```
If it is important to still call out the replacement of Excel and Confluence pages, I would list that after the functionality of the tool.

Author: sure. changed.

The following is a list of the most important features of the framework:

- Established a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product streams for install and upgrade observability.

>   - Inside-out Views

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - Inside-out views
```

Author: changed

    - Timing dashboard view that lets us focus on a single operation, and from that operation zoom out to the total product installation details.
    - Goss test dashboard view that lets us focus on a single test, and from that test zoom out to the total product test details.

>   - Outside-in Views

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - Outside-in views
```

Author: changed

- Multi-interval continuous health checks.
  This defines and implements periodic scheduled health checks to occur both during and after the installation or upgrade.
  The Grafana dashboard also allows administrators to view results only for specific time periods -- the past six hours, a day, or a week.

- The framework is automatically configured and run in CSM, even during installation and upgrade of CSM itself.

- The framework includes configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).
  These dashboards show the frequency of errors across the system, include panels to visualize the outliers, and help to identify trends across different dimensions.

The following IUF topics are discussed in the following subsections.

- [Observability Framework during CSM installs](#observability-framework-during-csm-installs)
  - [Overview](#overview-of-observability-framework-on-pit-node)
  - [Observability workflow](#observability-framework-workflow-on-pit-node)
  - [`systemd` services](#observability-framework-systemd-services-on-pit-node)
- [IUF timing dashboard](#iuf-timing-dashboard)
  - [Features](#timing-dashboard-features)

>   - [Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow](#prometheus-metrics-using-argo-workflow)
>   - [Timing dashboard](#timing-dashboard)

Reviewer 2: Edit to the ToC to match the suggested edits to this section.

```suggestion
  - [Collected timing metrics](#collected-timing-metrics)
```

Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=migrator t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.26+0000 lvl=info msg="migrations completed" performed=0 skipped=393 durati>
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=plugin.manager t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.42+0000 lvl=info msg="Plugin registered" pluginId=input
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=query_data t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.43+0000 lvl=info msg="Query Service initialization"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=live.push_http t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.44+0000 lvl=info msg="Live Push Gateway initialization"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=grafanaStorageLogger t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="storage starting"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="warming cache for startup"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=ngalert.multiorg.alertmanager t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.54+0000 lvl=info msg="starting MultiOrg Alertmanager"
Feb 08 23:06:38 redbull-pit grafana[82549]: logger=http.server t=2023-02-08T23:06:38.55+0000 lvl=info msg="HTTP Server Listen" address=[::]:3000 protocol=http>
```

## IUF timing dashboard

> ### Timing dashboard features
> 
> - Use Argo workflows to collect the install/upgrade timing details.
> - Create Argo workflows to get metrics from the details available.
> - Generate Prometheus install/upgrade timing metrics.
> - Create Grafana dashboard using Prometheus metrics.
> 
> ### Prometheus metrics using Argo workflow
> 
> The start time and end time can be obtained as Prometheus labels for the operations using Argo metrics implementation. The time stamp is recorded at the beginning and end of each operation.
> 
> Metrics that are captured for the operations:
> 
> - start time
> - end time
> - duration
> - status
> - product name
> - product version
> 
> Metrics that are captured for the stage:
> 
> - stage name
> - stage type
> - stage start time (the earliest start time of the all the operations in the stage)
> - stage end time (the latest end time of the all the operations in the stage)
> - stage duration (the difference between the stage end time and stage start time)
> - stage status (status is marked as succeeded if all the operations' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)
> 
> Metrics that are captured for the product:
> 
> - product name
> - product start time (start time of the process-media stage)
> - product end time (start time of the post-install-check stage)
> - product status (status is marked as succeeded if all the stages' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)
> 
> ### Timing dashboard
> 
> - Dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard to track install/upgrade status of any product, stage, and operation.
> - Dashboard calculates the execution time for the install/upgrade of any product, stage, and operation.
> - The status of the install/upgrade for product, stage, and operation are failed or succeeded.
> - There is a dropdown for selection of the product, stage, and operation. By default all are selected.
>   The framework defines and implements periodic scheduled health checks to occur both during and after installation or upgrade.
>   The Grafana dashboard also allows administrators to view results only for specific time periods -- the past six hours, a day, or a week.
> - Separate sections are created in the dashboard to see the details of product, stage, and operation.
> - The graph shows the duration for each stage and operation.
> 
> ![IUF timing dashboard](../../img/operations/TimingDashboard.png "Timing Dashboard")

Reviewer 2: The feature list does not appear to be a list of the features of the timing dashboard. It sounds more like it is describing how the data is collected that populates the dashboard. Or am I misunderstanding the bullets?

But the section labeled "Timing dashboard" does look like a feature list.

There is also a lot of information in here which is not really relevant to a customer end user. Details of how things are implemented could be useful in a troubleshooting document or supplemental document, but don't make sense to include in this overview document. That said, making an additional troubleshooting or supplemental document with the technical details is not a bad idea. It just makes this document harder to follow to include it here.

I suggest editing this section as follows, to make the section contents match up with their headings, and to remove some of the implementation details.

```suggestion
The IUF Timing dashboard provides timing information for installs and upgrades.

### Timing dashboard features

- Dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard to track install/upgrade status of any product, stage, and operation.
- Dashboard calculates the duration for the install/upgrade of any product, stage, and operation.

![IUF timing dashboard](../../img/operations/TimingDashboard.png "Timing Dashboard")

### Collected timing metrics

- Operation timing metrics
  - Start time
  - End time
  - Duration
  - Status
  - Product name
  - Product version
- Stage timing metrics
  - Stage name
  - Stage type
  - Stage start time (the earliest start time of the all the operations in the stage)
  - Stage end time (the latest end time of the all the operations in the stage)
  - Stage duration (the difference between the stage end time and stage start time)
  - Stage status (status is marked as succeeded if all the operations' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)
- Product timing metrics
  - Product name
  - Product start time (start time of the process-media stage)
  - Product end time (start time of the post-install-check stage)
  - Product status (status is marked as succeeded if all the stages' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)
```

pulled from `/etc/hosts` file. The log files generated from automated scripts that run a set of test suites are used.

In order to run the automated scripts, use the complete path of the script. For example, `/opt/cray/tests/install/ncn/automated/ncn-healthcheck`.

### Workflow

![Goss test workflow](../../img/operations/GossWorkflow.png "Goss Workflow")

### Log file format

Individual lines of logs are in the following format for each node or PIT node, test name, and source:

```json
{
  "log_timestamp": "20230118_094205.821955",
  "Product": "CSM",
  "log_script": "print_goss_json_results.py",
  "log_message": "Test result",
  "Description": "Validates that 'cray --version' is available and executes successfully on the local system.",
  "Execution Time (nanoseconds)": 1312368478,
  "Execution Time (seconds)": 1.312368478,
  "Node": "ncn-m001",
  "Result Code": 0,
  "Result String": "PASS",
  "Source": "http://ncn-m001.hmn:8997/ncn-healthcheck-master",
  "Test Name": "Command 'cray --version' Available",
  "Test Summary": "Command: command_available_1_cray_version: exit-status: matches expectation: [0]"
}
```

### Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor

> Grok-exporter is deployed on all of the Kubernetes master nodes, by using node affinity in its deployment.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

Grok-exporter is deployed on all of the Kubernetes master nodes, by using node affinity in its deployment.
```

Author: changed

        value: '{{`{{.logfile}}`}}'
        labels:
          example_test: '{{`{{.ex}}`}}'
    server:
     port: 9144
```

### Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard

After the preceding steps the `goss_tests` metrics are seen in Prometheus when Goss tests are run. Using these metrics,
Grafana dashboards are created to shows the Goss tests details visually.

Goss test dashboard features:

- The dashboard has a dropdown for products, suites, and tests.
- By default, all products, suites, and tests are selected for overall Goss tests result.
- The overall product result, total number of the products, products passed, products failed, and its execution time is seen.
- Suite results and test results are seen from the dashboard.
- Node-wise test results are seen with failed nodes, passed nodes, and the suite/test description.

![Goss test dashboard](../../img/operations/GossTestsDashboard.png "Goss Test Dashboard")

## Error dashboard

Error dashboards provide key glance at-a-insights about what is broken and needs attention.

The automatic generation of the desired Prometheus grok-exporter configuration is based upon passing in a set of regular expression patterns to detect.

> This includes, but is not limited to, regular expression patterns to match and generate metrics on phases of manual administrator steps, as well as phases of installation scripts and automation.

Reviewer 2: This sentence and the one before it sound like they are getting into implementation details that don't seem like they would necessarily interest customers using CSM. I imagine the information that would interest them is which logs are being checked for errors. They probably are less interested in how we do the actual checking. I'd suggest changing these two sentences to instead focus on summarizing what logs are being scanned to generate the error dashboards.

Reviewer: Changed

### Error dashboards features

> - Automate Grafana dashboards with error and failure message during CSM upgrade and install.
> - Create dashboard for issues comparison across multiple dimensions and clusters.
> - Monitor ConMan logs from the PIT node.
> - Parse log files with grok-exporter.
> - Create the Trend, Error, and Alert frequency dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The error dashboards provide the ability to examine errors in the cluster across multiple dimensions.
- The error dashboards pull in information from a variety of sources, including the following:
  - Error and failures encountered during upgrades and installs.
  - ConMan logs on the PIT node.
  - Goss test logs.
```

> - Grok-exporter parses the log files.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Parse log files with grok-exporter.
```

Author: changed

> # Install and Upgrade Observability Framework

Reviewer 2: I just noticed that this file is in a new observability subdirectory which contains no other files. Are you anticipating there being multiple documents relating to observability? If not, would it make more sense to put this file directly in the iuf directory instead?

Author: There will be more files in the future as we have more observability work till the end of this year.

## Overview

> The Install and Upgrade Observability Framework includes Goss test health check results in a visual Grafana dashboard, providing key insights into the health of the system, from simple components to a functional and aggregate view of health.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Install and Upgrade Observability Framework collects Goss test health check results and presents them in a visual Grafana dashboard, providing key insights into the health of the system.
```

> The automated Time to Install (TTI) and Time to Upgrade(TTU) provides us the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install like when and on what machine a given command was run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The automated Time to Install (TTI) and Time to Upgrade (TTU) provide the time and other important details for each portion of the HPC install, such as when and on what machine a given command was run.
```

> This allows us to dynamically capture and store in a file how long the commands/scripts were running, as well what inactivity time was there from the user, as well as how much debug time.
> 
> The automated observability time tracking will record the time spent in actual work, debug, wait time, and total time at multiple parts of install for all the product streams.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For install of each product stream, the observability framework records the time spent in actual work, debugging, and waiting, as well as the total duration.
```

The following is a list of the most important features of the framework:

> - Established a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product streams for install and upgrade observability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Provides a consistent framework for health checks/validation, metrics, and reporting for all product stream  installs and upgrades.
```

  - Inside-out views

>     - Timing dashboard view that lets us focus on a single operation, and from that operation zoom out to the total product installation details.
>     - Goss test dashboard view that lets us focus on a single test, and from that test zoom out to the total product test details.
>   - Outside-in views
>     - Timing dashboard view that shows total product details, and from that zoom in to focus on details of a single installation operation.
>     - Goss test dashboard view that shows total product test details, and from that zoom in to focus on details of a single test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Timing dashboard view that focuses on a single operation, and from that operation an administrator can zoom out to view the total product installation details.
    - Goss test dashboard view that focuses on a single test, and from that test an administrator can zoom out to view the total product test details.
  - Outside-in views
    - Timing dashboard view that shows total product details, and from that view an administrator can zoom in to focus on details of a single installation operation.
    - Goss test dashboard view that shows total product test details, and from that view an administrator can zoom in to focus on details of a single test.
```

  - Product stream health

- Drill down health dashboard with roll up.
  - Aggregate checks
    - Problem/OK counts across each product stream.
  - Functional checks
    - Product stream functional Goss suites for key areas.
    - For example: REST APIs, micro-services, Kubernetes, network, and database health for the specific product stream.
  - Granular checks
    - Individual Goss tests for component level health checks within a functional area of a given product stream.
    - For example: management switch configuration verification, routing table checks on the OS, gateway tests, and Container Network Interface (CNI) tests.

- Boot, install, and upgrade duration monitoring.
  This does automatic calculation and reporting of both the time a given section of install/upgrade has taken, as well as metrics on Goss test successes and failures.

> - Time, node, product stream, capacity, and other dimensions based health and performance insight.

Reviewer 2: What does capacity mean in this bullet? What's an example of that?

```suggestion
- Ability to view health and duration information across different dimensions such as time, node, product stream, capacity, and others.
```

- Multi-interval continuous health checks.
  This defines and implements periodic scheduled health checks to occur both during and after the installation or upgrade.
  The Grafana dashboard also allows administrators to view results only for specific time periods -- the past six hours, a day, or a week.

- Automate the Observability framework , installation, and configuration of the components involved in the Install and Upgrade Observability Framework in a CSM environment.

> - The automatic generation of configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The framework includes configurable Grafana dashboards that provide key insights and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).
```

Metrics that are captured for the product:

- product name
- product start time (start time of the process-media stage)
- product end time (start time of the post-install-check stage)
- product status (status is marked as succeeded if all the stages' statuses are succeeded, otherwise it is marked as failed)

### Timing dashboard

- Dynamic top-down and bottom-up dashboard to track install/upgrade status of any product, stage, and operation.
- Dashboard calculates the execution time for the install/upgrade of any product, stage, and operation.
- The status of the install/upgrade for product, stage, and operation are failed or succeeded.
- There is a dropdown for selection of the product, stage, and operation. By default all are selected.
  The framework defines and implements periodic scheduled health checks to occur both during and after installation or upgrade.
  The frequency can be determined by administrator by running the tests over a period of time and selecting the appropriate time interval in the Grafana dashboard to check the results for past six hours, a day, and a week.
- Separate sections are created in the dashboard to see the details of product, stage, and operation.

> - There is a graph showing the duration for each stage and operation is added.

Reviewer 2: This sentence doesn't make sense. The first part sounds okay -- "There is a graph showing the duration for each stage".
But I don't understand the "and operation is added." part.
Is this trying to say that a graph was added that shows the duration for each stage and operation? If so, it should be reworded.

![IUF timing dashboard](../../img/operations/TimingDashboard.png "Timing Dashboard")

## Goss tests for PIT and NCN

### Goss test overview

The observability tooling monitors the logs for Goss tests run by using the automated scripts. These scripts are regularly run during install/upgrade. For each Goss test, metrics are generated on its duration and success or failure.

> This framework provides a set of quantifiable metrics used to create a visual Grafana health dashboard of all environments. This provides administrators with insight on which tests fail most, or which clusters have the most problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This framework provides a set of quantifiable metrics used to create a visual Grafana health dashboard of all environments. This provides administrators with insight on which areas are experiencing problems.
```

Trend analysis of this data in Grafana across different dimensions may point out statistically where the highest frequency of issues occurs.
It also provides administrators an at-a-glance dashboard where they can visually see the complete system health. This includes the option to drill down from the aggregate view of the environment to the functional areas or the components.

Goss test logs are scraped using grok-exporter and visualized on Grafana using captured data.

> [`csm-testing` repository](https://github.com/Cray-HPE/csm-testing/tree/main/goss-testing/) contains all of the tests, suites, and scripts to execute these Goss tests.
> Automated scripts run the Goss tests in batches. These batches are based on functionality or the check performed in CSM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> A single Goss test is a YAML file and a collection of these Goss tests can be used together by adding them in another YAML file, called a test suite. These suites can be invoked through the CSM-provided scripts to get a log file with results for the tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Goss tests are contained in YAML file. A YAML file containing a list of Goss test files is called a test suite. These suites are run through the CSM-provided scripts to get a log file with results for the tests.
```

> 
> For example, a Goss test to validate expected Kubernetes nodes exists using the `kubectl` command based on node names
> pulled from `/etc/hosts` file. The log files generated from automated scripts that run a set of test suites are used.

Reviewer 2: This example seems like it is more likely to be confusing to people than to be helpful. I'm not sure what information it is providing that is relevant to the observability framework page. I'd suggest removing it.

```suggestion
```

> 
> In order to run the automated scripts, use the complete path of the script. For example, `/opt/cray/tests/install/ncn/automated/ncn-healthcheck`.

Reviewer 2: I'm also not sure that this is the right place to be including this type of information. If we want to explain to them how to run the tests, it makes more sense to link to the health check docs.

```suggestion
```

### Workflow

![Goss test workflow](../../img/operations/GossWorkflow.png "Goss Workflow")

### Log file format

Individual lines of logs are in the following format for each node, test name, and source:

```json
{
  "log_timestamp": "20230118_094205.821955",
  "Product": "CSM",
  "log_script": "print_goss_json_results.py",
  "log_message": "Test result",
  "Description": "Validates that 'cray --version' is available and executes successfully on the local system.",
  "Execution Time (nanoseconds)": 1312368478,
  "Execution Time (seconds)": 1.312368478,
  "Node": "ncn-m001",
  "Result Code": 0,
  "Result String": "PASS",
  "Source": "http://ncn-m001.hmn:8997/ncn-healthcheck-master",
  "Test Name": "Command 'cray --version' Available",
  "Test Summary": "Command: command_available_1_cray_version: exit-status: matches expectation: [0]"
}
```

### Grok-exporter deployment, service, and service-monitor

Grok-exporter is deployed on all of the Kubernetes master nodes, by using node affinity in its deployment.
The service for the grok-exporter is accessible at port `9144`. Service-monitor implementation is for Prometheus to access the metrics that are created by the grok-exporter.

> ### Configuration file for the grok-exporter

Reviewer 2: Is it expected that a customer will need to make changes to this file? If not, we may want to add some explanation here that this information is being provided as background information, but that the end user doesn't need to be aware of it in order for the data to be collected and for them to view it.

> The configuration file for the grok-exporter parses the Goss test log files and creates metrics from them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration file for the grok-exporter provides instructions on how to parse the Goss test log files and creates metrics from them.
```

      - type: gauge
        name: example_metric
        help: EXAMPLE METRIC HELP
        match: '{"log_file": "%{REGEX:logfile}", "TEST": "%{EXAMPLE:ex}"}'
        value: '{{`{{.logfile}}`}}'
        labels:
          example_test: '{{`{{.ex}}`}}'
    server:
     port: 9144
```

### Prometheus metrics and Grafana dashboard

After the preceding steps the `goss_tests` metrics are seen in Prometheus when Goss tests are run. Using these metrics,
Grafana dashboards are created to shows the Goss tests details visually.

Goss test dashboard features:

- The dashboard has a dropdown for products, suites, and tests.
- By default, all products, suites, and tests are selected for overall Goss tests result.
- The overall product result, total number of the products, products passed, products failed, and its execution time is seen.
- Suite results and test results are seen from the dashboard.
- Node-wise test results are seen with failed nodes, passed nodes, and the suite/test description.

![Goss test dashboard](../../img/operations/GossTestsDashboard.png "Goss Test Dashboard")

## Error dashboard

Error dashboards provide key glance at-a-insights about what is broken and needs attention.

> The automatic generation of the desired Prometheus grok-exporter configuration is based upon passing in a set of regular expression patterns to detect.

Reviewer 2: These grok-exporter configurations are automatically generated on the system? They aren't something included with CSM? Who is passing in these regular expressions on the system to generate the configurations?

Reviewer: For generating grok-exporter configuration we need to pass set of regex in conig file. We have created regex pattern to detect.

Reviewer 2: But this sentence as written is talking about automatic generation of the grok-exporter configuration. It sounds like you're saying that this generation is something you've already done, not something that actually happens on the live system. If that's the case, why is this sentence talking about automatically generating the configuration?

Reviewer: changed

This includes, but is not limited to, regular expression patterns to match and generate metrics on phases of manual administrator steps, as well as phases of installation scripts and automation.

### Error dashboards features

- Automate Grafana dashboards with error and failure message during CSM upgrade and install.

> - Create dashboard for issues comparison across multiple dimensions and clusters.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean a dashboard that spans multiple Kubernetes clusters? A dashboard on one CSM system that can see the Kubernetes clusters of other systems? Or is this referring to a different type of cluster?

Reviewer: multiple dimensions and clusters means here - within the cluster it covers all different dimensions for comparison.

- Monitor ConMan logs from the PIT node.

> - Parse log files with grok-exporter.

Reviewer 2: This bullet confuses me. The fact that log files are parsed by grok-exporter doesn't seem like a feature of the error dashboard. Is this trying to say that the error dashboard can display errors from log files, because they were parsed with grok-exporter?

Also, does this specifically mean Goss test log files? Or does it include other log files?

Reviewer: Is this trying to say that the error dashboard can display errors from log files, because they were parsed with grok-exporter? - Yes

This includes console monitoring logs.

> - Create the Trend, Error, and Alert frequency dashboard.

Reviewer 2: The verb Create here confuses me. A feature of the error dashboards is that it creates the Trend, Error, and Alert frequency dashboard? Is this supposed to be saying that the "Trend, Error, And Alert frequency" dashboard is an error dashboard that is available to the administrator?

Reviewer: This means to create error dashboards from where administrator will get Trend, Error, and Alert frequency information or insights.

Reviewer 2: So the dashboards aren't already there? The administrator has to create them?

### Error dashboards

> Dashboards tracking different types of errors during install/upgrade.

Reviewer 2: The last section specifically mentions the "Error, Trend, and Alert frequency" dashboard, but then this dashboard isn't listed here. Why is that?

Reviewer: These are error dashboards what we covered as a part of Alice. And Trend means what error trend it is showing for different ncn while installation. So basically "Error, Trend, and Alert frequency" was not the name of the dashboard rather it was about the insights that these dashboards will have.

> - Frequency of message about known issues dashboard

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? "Frequency of message about known issues"? I see from the graphic in the PR that this apparently is the name of a dashboard, but it would be good to clarify what exactly it is showing.

Reviewer: Clarify in the document? This means the dashboard shows up the count (frequency) of the known issues (can be any error or failure) that is occuring during CSM installation.

Reviewer 2: So known issues here doesn't have the usual meaning that we use in the docs? Usually when we say "known issues" we mean "failures that exist in the product that we knew about before we shipped it", usually in the context of providing them with information on how to deal with them if they are seen. In this case, are you saying it means any failure or error that is discovered during CSM installation?

Reviewer: https://github.com/Cray-HPE/docs-csm/pull/3359#discussion_r1128289942 - yes correct

> - CSM environments install progress dashboard

Reviewer 2: I see that environments is plural here. This dashboard monitors multiple CSM environments?

Reviewer 2: Sure, but that is still the one CSM environment. Saying "CSM environments" doesn't sound like we're talking about a single CSM system anymore. I'd suggest just removing the word environments

```suggestion
- CSM install progress dashboard
```
